ў
arXiv:1501.00219v1 [stat.ME] 31 Dec 2014
SPECTRAL DIAGONAL ENSEMBLE KALMAN FILTERS
IVAN KASANICKÝ*, JAN MANDEL*†, AND MARTIN VEJMELKA*
Abstract. A new type of ensemble Kalman filter is developed, which is based on replacing the sample covariance in the analysis step by its diagonal in a spectral basis. It is proved that this technique improves the approximation of the covariance when the covariance itself is diagonal in the spectral basis, as is the case, e.g., for a second-order stationary random field and the Fourier basis. The method is extended by wavelets to the case when the state variables are random fields which are not spatially homogeneous. Efficient implementations by the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT) are presented for several types of observations, including high-dimensional data given on a part of the domain, such as radar and satellite images. Computational experiments confirm that the method performs well on the Lorenz 96 problem and the shallow water equations with very small ensembles and over multiple analysis cycles..
1. Introduction. Data assimilation consists of incorporating new data periodically into computations in progress, which is of interest in many fields, including weather forecasting (e.g., Kalnay, 2003; Lahoz et al., 2010). One data assimilation method is filtering (e.g., Anderson and Moore, 1979), which is a sequential Bayesian estimation of the state at a given time given the data received up to that time. The probability distribution of the system state is advanced in time by a computational model, while the data is assimilated by modifying the probability distribution of the state by an application the Bayes theorem, called analysis. In the methods considered here, data is assimilated in discrete time steps, called analysis cycles, and the probability distributions are represented by their mean and covariance (thus making a tacit assumption that they are at least close to gaussian). When the state covariance is given externally, bayesian estimation becomes the classical optimal statistical interpolation (OSI). The Kalman filter (KF) uses the same computation as OSI in the analysis, but it evolves the covariance matrix of the state in time along with the model state. Since the covariance matrix can be large, the KF is not suitable for high-dimensional systems. The ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) (Evensen, 2009) replaces the state covariance by the sample covariance computed from an ensemble of simulations, which represent the state probability distribution. It can be proved that the EnKF converges to the KF in the large ensemble limit (Kwiatkowski and Mandel, 2014; Le Gland et al., 2011; Mandel et al., 2011) in the gaussian case, but an acceptable approximation may require hundreds of ensemble members (Evensen, 2009), because of spurious long-distance correlations in the sample covariance due to its low rank. Localization techniques (e.g., Anderson, 2001; Furrer and Bengtsson, 2007; Hunt et al., 2007), essentially suppress long-distance covariance terms (Sakov and Bertino, 2010), which improves EnKF performance for small ensembles.
FFT EnKF (Mandel et al., 2010a,b) was proposed as an alternative approach to localization, based on replacing the sample covariance in the EnKF by its diagonal in the Fourier space. This approach is motivated by the fact that a random field in cartesian geometry is second order stationary (that is, the covariance between the values at two points depends only on their distance vector) if and only if its covariance in the Fourier space is diagonal (e.g., Pannekoucke et al., 2007). On a sphere, an isotropic random field has diagonal covariance in the basis of spherical harmonics (Boer, 1983), so similar algorithms can be developed there as well. However, the stationarity assumption does not allow the covariance to vary spatially. For this reason, the FFT EnKF was extended to wavelet EnKF (Beezley et al., 2011). The use of wavelets results in an automatic localization, which varies in space adaptively. For wavelets, the effect of the diagonal spectral approximation is
\( ^{1} \) Institute of Computer Science, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
\( ^{2} \) Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Colorado Denver
1<｜end▁of▁sentence｜>